Requirements for monitoring differ depending on your enterprise environment,
but generally there are a few common themes.
Log file monitoring, I suggest no matter what environment you're in,
these get placed into some form of centralized logging,
for example, a Syslog server, use the ELK Stack,
which is Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana,
although the need for Logstash is reduced these days,
and another great option is Splunk.
Many message brokers expose their management APIs
through Java Management Extensions or JMX.
It's a great tool and provides lots of capabilities; however,
one thing I find frustrating is that it can be difficult to access
remote brokers in a secure manner using standard JMX.
In general,
it requires opening up ports and correctly securing your JMX endpoint.
These days, I prefer to keep the JMX endpoint bound to the localhost,
reducing its exposure,
and send JMX commands to the box remotely via something like Ansible.
If you are happy to expose JMX,
then maybe also consider using something like Jolokia and Hawtio,
which provide JMX over HTTP with centralized administration.
It's also important to monitor the size of your queues and topics,
the number of consumers,
as well as the statistics for the message broker
itself and the host they're running on.
To demonstrate this,
here is a simple dashboard I've put together using the ELK Stack.
It shows some of the queue sizes, number of consumers,
and number of connections to the broker,
and also the most recent log entries from the message brokers themselves.
I suggest you spend the time trying to put something like this together, no matter what tool you use to do it.